# 3081 Lab03 C++ Class Basics
_(Due: Thursday, February. 10, 2022 @ 11:59pm)_

## What You Will Learn

1. Create the header and source file for a new C++ class.
2. Create a constructor for a class.
3. Define public methods and private class members.
4. Use operator overloading.
5. How to understand makefiles.

### Retrieve Class Materials

Navigate to your repository.

```bash
% cd <path_to_directory_repo-userid>
```

Pull down the latest batch of code

```bash
% git pull
```


### What's in labs/lab03_classes

- main.cc:
  - This contains the main function, which creates and operates on a set of vectors.

- Makefile:
  - This makefile is provided to allow you to easily build the executable to run this program, assuming you've created a proper vector3.h and vector3.cc set of files. It also provides for a _clean_ target, to ease removal of the resulting files generated by the build process.

- README.md:
  - You're reading this now.


### What You Will Add

- vector3.h ([see example](https://github.umn.edu/umn-csci-3081-s22/examples/tree/main/labs/lab2)):
  - The header file for this new class. It should include the declaration of two constructors and the five class methods: 
    - Constructor (*it is a good approach to set the data type of the x, y, z as Private however for this lab set it as Public (we need this to be public for the autograder to work*)
    - Print
    - [**Overloading**](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cplusplus/cpp_overloading.htm) of the operators 
      - addition operator +
      - substration operator -
      - multiplication operator * *Note: this is scalar multiplication*
      - division operator / *Note: this is scalar division*

- vector3.cc:
  - The source file for the class definition.

- If you are not familiar with header file guards, you can go to the Zybook section 6.18 for reference: [Zybook section link](https://learn.zybooks.com/zybook/UMNCSCI3081WOrbanSpring2022/chapter/6/section/18?content_resource_id=56063603)

### Building the Class Vector3

<hr>
  **The primary goal of this lab is for you to build a simple C++ class to fulfill the interface as exhibited in the provided main.cc file.**
<hr>

Review _main.cc_ now to see how the class will be used. Notice the class method Print and several operators (+,-,*,/). A vector3 should have an x, y, and z component, both of which are private to the class, but there is no indication in the _main.cc_ of how those are specified or used, thus implementation is up to you.

 Here is an example of how to create the addition operator using operator overloading:

 ```c++
Vector3 Vector3::operator+(Vector3 vec) {
  return Vector3(x + vec.x, y + vec.y, z + vec.z);
}
```

Notice that the operator _operator+(Vector3)_ is a class method. It adds two vectors together, but only 1 Vector3 object is passed in. 

### Executing Lab Code

The code provided for lab03 will create an executable by compiling the provided
C++ files using the _Makefile_. The resulting executable, _vector_app_, should be created if your vector3.h and vector3.cc files do not cause syntax errors.

Open the _Makefile_ and take note of each rule.  Determine the target, dependencies, and recipe for each.  For example, to build vector3.o, it depends on vector3.h and vector3.cc.  The recipe for building vector3.o is ```g++ -c vector3.cc -o vector3.o```.  Look at the _Makefile_ to consider the target, dependencies, and recipe for building the vector_app.

Build the executable using the makefile and run the executable.

```bash
% <Locate to the repo first>
% cd labs/lab03-classes
% make
% ./vector_app
```

If there is an error when typing make, resolve the error and run make again.  Your output should look like the following:

```
CSCI3081W Lab 3
Vector 1 contains the following: 
[0, 0, 0]
Vector 2 contains the following: 
[1, 1, 1]
Vector 3 contains the following: 
[3, 4, 5]
Vector 4 contains the following: 
[4, 5, 6]
Vector 5 contains the following: 
[2, 3, 4]
Vector 6 contains the following: 
[9, 12, 15]
Vector 7 contains the following: 
[1.5, 2, 2.5]
Initial Position: [0, 0, 0]
Velocity: [1, 1, 0]
dt: 0.1
Position at i=0: [0.1, 0.1, 0]
Position at i=1: [0.2, 0.2, 0]
Position at i=2: [0.3, 0.3, 0]
Position at i=3: [0.4, 0.4, 0]
Position at i=4: [0.5, 0.5, 0]
Position at i=5: [0.6, 0.6, 0]
Position at i=6: [0.7, 0.7, 0]
Position at i=7: [0.8, 0.8, 0]
Position at i=8: [0.9, 0.9, 0]
Position at i=9: [1, 1, 0]
```

Run the following:

```
make clean
```

Consider the following questions: What happens to the .o files and the vector_app?  Why would you want to do this?

### **Submission**

Submit your work by uploading the following files to Gradescope for the Lab03 assignment.  Your code will be automatically graded and your score recorded.

 - vector3.h
 - vector3.cc

You are welcome to keep changing and submitting this lab up to the deadline.  Gradescope will recompile and test your code.

THIS LAB IS COMPLETE.

Congratulations!!
